<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE chapter SYSTEM "gnc-gui-C.dtd">
<!-- (Do not remove this comment block.)
  Version: 2.0.0
  Last modified: July 9th 2006
  Maintainers:
    Chris Lyttle <chris@wilddev.net>
  Author:
    Jon Lapham <lapham@extracta.com.br>
  updated Patrick Schweiger <pks@spiffykitty.com>
  Originally designed by Carol Champagne.
  Translators:
    (translators put your name and email here)
-->
<chapter id="chapter_busnss">
  <title>Business Features</title>

  <para>The accounting needs of a business are quite different from that of a person. Businesses have
    customers that owe money, vendors which are owed money, employee payroll, more complex tax laws,
    etc. &app; offers business oriented features to facilitate these needs.
  </para>

  <para>Accounts Receivable (A/R) are used by businesses to record sales for which they are not immediately
    paid. Accounts Payable (A/P) record bills that they have received, but might not pay until
    later. These types of accounts are used primarily when you have a lot of bills and receipts
    flowing in and out, and do not want to lose track of them just because you do not pay or get
    paid right away. For most home users, A/R and A/P are too complicated to be worth the effort.
  </para>

  <para>Accounts Receivable (or A/R) refers to products or services provided by your company for which
    payment has not yet been received. This is represented on the balance sheet as an asset, because
    the expectation is that you will receive payment soon.
  </para>

  <para>Accounts Payable (or A/P) refers to products or services bought by your company for which payment
    has not yet been sent. This is represented on the balance sheet as a liability because you will
    have to pay for them.
  </para>

  <sect1 id="busnss-ar-setup1">
    <title>Initial Setup</title>

    <para>To set up &app; to handle accounts receivable and accounts payable for a company the following
      preliminary steps must be done.
    </para>

    <sect2 id="busnss-setupacct2">
      <title>Account Setup</title>

      <para>There are many different ways to set up a business account hierarchy. You can start with the
        Business Accounts setup which is available from the New Account Hierarchy assistant, or you
        could build one manually. To access the prebuilt Business Accounts, start &app; and click on
        <menuchoice>
          <guimenu>File</guimenu><guimenuitem>New File</guimenuitem>
        </menuchoice>
        and proceed until you see the list of available accounts, select <emphasis>Business
        Accounts</emphasis>.
      </para>

      <note>
        <para>The prebuilt Business Account hierarchy will not meet your needs exactly. You will need to make
          adjustments for the hierarchy to function well with your particular situation. It should
          be close enough that it is recommended you begin with it.
        </para>
      </note>
<!--
      <para>To use &app;&rsquo;s integrated accounts
      payable system, you must first setup an account of the <emphasis>A/Payable</emphasis>
      type. The <emphasis>A/Payable</emphasis> account is usually a sub-account
      under Liabilities. It is within this account that the integrated A/P system
      places transactions.
      <screen>Basic A/P Account Hierarchy:

-Assets
  -Bank
-Liabilities
  -Accounts Payable
-Expenses
  -AP Expenses</screen>
</para>

     <para>You need to add additional asset accounts and real expense accounts to make
     this hierarchy useful.  The important aspects of this hierarchy are that you need
     an expense account and an Accounts Payable account, with account type set to
     <emphasis>A/Payable</emphasis>.</para>
-->
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="busnss-ar-setuptaxtables">
      <title>Tax Tables</title>

      <para>Tax Tables can used to determine the tax for customer invoices (or vendor bills).
      </para>

      <para>A tax table can be assigned to an invoice line or bill line.
      </para>

      <para>The default invoice line tax table can be assigned to each customer and the default bill line tax
        table can be assigned to each vendor.
      </para>

      <para>The default tax table for new customers or new vendors can be specified in the <emphasis>Book
        Options </emphasis> window which can be accessed by
        <menuchoice>
          <guimenu>File</guimenu> <guisubmenu>Properties</guisubmenu>
          <guimenuitem>Business</guimenuitem>
        </menuchoice>
        tab.
      </para>

      <para>Tax Tables are maintained using the <emphasis>Sales Tax Table</emphasis> editor which is accessed
        via menu
        <menuchoice>
          <guimenu>Business</guimenu><guimenuitem>Sales Tax Table</guimenuitem>
        </menuchoice>
        . The following fields should be entered:
      </para>

      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Name</guilabel> This is the tax table name.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Type</guilabel> Either <guilabel>Percent %</guilabel> or <guilabel>Value $</guilabel>.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Value</guilabel>This is the percentage or value depending on <guilabel>Type</guilabel>.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Account</guilabel> This is the account to which tax will be posted. For tax collected from
            customers, this should probably be a Liability account as it must be payed to the
            government. For tax paid to vendors, if tax laws allow tax paid to vendors to offset tax
            collected from customers, this should probably also be a Liability account (even though
            it will usually have a debit balance) so that the net tax owed to the government can be
            easily observed.
          </para>

          <para>If you set up Tax on Purchases and Tax on Sales as subaccounts of Liabilities:Tax then the net tax
            will be rolled up and can be seen in the &app; Accounts tab.
          </para>

          <para><emphasis>If unsure about tax law requirements, get professional advice. </emphasis>
          </para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="busnss-setupcname">
      <title>Company Registration</title>

      <para>After you have built the account structure and defined your tax tables, register the &app; file as
        belonging to your company by filling in the data requested in the
        <xref linkend="business-book-options" /> accessible from the
        <menuchoice>
          <guimenu>File</guimenu><guimenuitem>Properties</guimenuitem>
        </menuchoice>
        menu item.
      </para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="busnss-setup-cntrs">
      <title>Counters</title>

      <para>Define the format and last used numbers of codes such as customer, invoice, vendor, bill, employee,
        expense voucher, job number and order. See <xref linkend="counters-book-options" />.
      </para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="busnss_setup_pref">
      <title>Business Preferences</title>

      <para>Set options on the Business tab of the &app; preferences, which is accessed via
        <menuchoice>
          <guimenu>Edit</guimenu><guimenuitem>Preferences</guimenuitem>
        </menuchoice>
        (
        <menuchoice>
          <guimenu>GnuCash</guimenu><guimenuitem>Preferences</guimenuitem>
        </menuchoice>
        on &mac;). See <xref linkend="prefs-biz" />.
      </para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="busnss-ar-setupterms">
      <title>Billing Terms</title>

      <para>Billing Terms can be used to determine the payment due date and be a guide for determining discount
        for early payment of invoices (or vendor bills).
      </para>

      <caution>
        <para>As of &app; 2.6.7, Billing terms are only partially supported. Date due is calculated but discount
          amount is not.
        </para>

        <para>Discount for early invoice payment is not implemented. There are 2 ways this may be done, although
          neither is recommended, and professional advice should be used to confirm that regulations
          are being complied with:
          <itemizedlist>
            <listitem>
              <para>After creating and posting a payment which pays the invoice in full, manually edit the payment
                transaction (usually strongly discouraged) and split the payment to reduce it by the
                amount of the discount and a create a compensating split in an income (discount)
                account.
              </para>
            </listitem>

            <listitem>
              <para>Alternatively, after creating and posting a payment for the discounted amount, create a credit note
                for the discount using a specific negative sales income (discount) account for the
                transfer account.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </itemizedlist>
        </para>
      </caution>

      <para>You can specify the billing terms on each invoice/bill. Invoice billing terms will default from the
        customer billing terms. Bill billing terms will default from the vendor billing terms.
      </para>

      <para>Billing Terms are maintained using the Billing Terms Editor which is accessed via menu
        <menuchoice>
          <guimenu>Business</guimenu><guimenuitem>Billing Terms Editor</guimenuitem>
        </menuchoice>
        . The following fields should be entered:
      </para>

      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Name</guilabel> The internal name of the billing term. For some examples of billing term
            names and descriptions see <ulink url="&url-wiki-pmt-term;" />
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Description</guilabel> The description of the billing term, printed on invoices
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>There are 2 types of billing terms, with different information to be entered
          </para>

          <itemizedlist>
            <listitem>
              <para>Type Days
              </para>

              <itemizedlist>
                <listitem>
                  <para><guilabel>Due Days</guilabel> The invoice or bill is due to be paid within this number of days after
                    the post date
                  </para>
                </listitem>

                <listitem>
                  <para><guilabel>Discount Days</guilabel> The number of days after the post date during which a discount
                    will be applied for early payment
                  </para>
                </listitem>

                <listitem>
                  <para><guilabel>Discount %</guilabel> The percentage discount applied for early payment
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </itemizedlist>
            </listitem>

            <listitem>
              <para>Type Proximo
              </para>

              <itemizedlist>
                <listitem>
                  <para><guilabel>Due Day</guilabel> The day of the month bills are due
                  </para>
                </listitem>

                <listitem>
                  <para><guilabel>Discount Day</guilabel> The last day of the month for the early payment discount
                  </para>
                </listitem>

                <listitem>
                  <para><guilabel>Discount %</guilabel> The discount percentage applied if paid early
                  </para>
                </listitem>

                <listitem>
                  <para><guilabel>Cutoff Day</guilabel> The cutoff day for applying bills to the next month. After the
                    cutoff, bills are applied to the following month. Negative values count
                    backwards from the end of the month.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </itemizedlist>
            </listitem>
          </itemizedlist>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
    </sect2>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="busnss-ar-components1">
    <title>Accounts Receivable</title>

    <para>&app; has an integrated accounts receivable system.
    </para>

    <para>To use &app;&rsquo;s integrated accounts receivable system, you must first set up <emphasis>Accounts
      Receivable</emphasis> accounts of type <emphasis>A/Receivable</emphasis> under
      <emphasis>Assets</emphasis> to accrue income you're owed. It is within this account that the
      integrated A/R system will place transactions, debiting it when you post bills and crediting
      it when you receive payments.
    </para>

    <example>
      <title>Basic A/R Account Hierarchy</title>
<screen>-Assets
  -Accounts Receivable
  -Checking
-Income
  -Sales
-Liabilities
  -Tax
    -Tax on Purchases
    -Tax on Sales</screen>
    </example>

    <important>
      <para>If you deal with customers in more than one currency you will need a separate <emphasis>Accounts
        Receivable</emphasis> account for each currency:
<screen>-Assets
  -Accounts Receivable
    -CHF
    -EUR
    :</screen>
      </para>
    </important>

    <note>
      <para>You need to add additional asset, expense, and income accounts to this hierarchy for it to be
        useful. The important aspects of this hierarchy are the use of an income account and the
        <emphasis>Accounts Receivable</emphasis> asset account, with account type set to
        <emphasis>A/Receivable</emphasis>.
      </para>
    </note>

    <para>The transactions generated by the A/R system are recorded within the <emphasis>Accounts
      Receivable</emphasis> account. You generally do not work directly with this account. You
      generally work with the four integrated &app; A/R application components available through the
      <menuchoice>
        <guimenu>Business</guimenu> <guisubmenu>Customer</guisubmenu>
      </menuchoice>
      sub-menu. These four components are:
    </para>

    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
        <term><xref linkend="busnss-ar-customers1" /></term>

        <listitem>
          <para>People or companies to whom you sell products or services on credit.
          </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><xref linkend="busnss-ar-invoices1" /></term>

        <listitem>
          <para>The physical invoice you send to a customer to request payment. This invoice contains an itemized
            list of things you sold.
          </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><xref linkend="busnss-ar-jobs1" /></term>

        <listitem>
          <para>Is where you register Customer Jobs. Jobs are a mechanism by which you can group multiple invoices
            to a particular customer.
          </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term><xref linkend="busnss-ar-payment1" /></term>

        <listitem>
          <para>Used to register payments you received from a customer.
          </para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>

    <para>The following sections introduce the individual components in more detail.
    </para>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="busnss-ar-customers1">
    <title>Customers</title>

    <para>Customers are people or companies to whom you sell goods or services. They must be registered within
      the A/R system.
    </para>

    <sect2 id="busnss-ar-custnew2">
      <title>New</title>

      <para>To register a new customer, enter the menu
        <menuchoice>
          <guimenu>Business</guimenu><guisubmenu>Customer</guisubmenu> <guimenuitem>New
          Customer</guimenuitem>
        </menuchoice>
        . Fill in customer information, such as Company Name, Address, Phone, Fax, etc. Below is a
        list of the other options:
      </para>

      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Identification - Customer Number</guilabel> - can be any number by which you would like to
            refer to this customer. You may leave it blank and a number will be chosen
            automatically. See <xref linkend="counters-book-options" /> for more info.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Identification - Active</guilabel> - differentiates active customers from inactive ones.
            This is useful when you have many past customers, and you want to see only those marked
            active.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Billing Address - Name</guilabel> - is the contact name of the person to receive the
            invoices.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Notes</guilabel> - records any additional comments about the customer.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Billing Information - Currency</guilabel> - specifies the billing currency for this
            customer. It will default to the default currency set in
            <guilabel>Preferences</guilabel>
          </para>

          <important>
            <para>All invoices will be denominated in this currency and &app; will require an Accounts Receivable
              account in this currency.
            </para>
          </important>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Billing Information - Terms</guilabel> - specifies the default billing terms for this
            customer. Billing terms must be preregistered using
            <menuchoice>
              <guimenu>Business</guimenu> <guimenuitem>Billing Terms Editor</guimenuitem>
            </menuchoice>
            .
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Billing Information - Discount</guilabel> - gives the customer a default percentage based
            discount at the time of invoice creation. Enter a value from 0 to 100. You can override
            the default discount when you create an invoice.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Billing Information - Credit Limit</guilabel> - stores the maximum credit you are willing
            to extend to the customer. This field is for your reference purposes only. &app; does
            not use the value.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Billing Information - Tax Included</guilabel> - this specifies whether nor not tax is
            included in invoice amounts by default. You can choose <guilabel>Yes</guilabel>,
            <guilabel>No</guilabel>, or <guilabel>Use Global</guilabel>.
            <itemizedlist>
              <listitem>
                <para><guilabel>Yes</guilabel> means that the tax is already included in amounts on invoices.
                </para>
              </listitem>

              <listitem>
                <para><guilabel>No</guilabel> means tax is not included.
                </para>
              </listitem>

              <listitem>
                <para><guilabel>Use Global</guilabel> means to use the setting made in the global preferences accessible
                  through
                  <menuchoice>
                    <guimenu>Edit</guimenu> <guimenuitem>Preferences</guimenuitem>
                  </menuchoice>
                  (
                  <menuchoice>
                    <guimenu>Gnucash</guimenu><guimenuitem>Preferences</guimenuitem>
                  </menuchoice>
                  on &mac;).
                </para>
              </listitem>
            </itemizedlist>
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Billing Information - Tax Table</guilabel> - specifies a default tax table to apply to
            invoice line items. Tax tables must be registered from the
            <menuchoice>
              <guimenu>Business</guimenu> <guimenuitem>Tax Table Editor</guimenuitem>
            </menuchoice>
            menu item.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Shipping Address</guilabel> - records the customer&rsquo;s shipping address if it is
            different from the billing address. The shipping address is for your reference. &app;
            does not use the value.
          </para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="busnss-ar-custfind2">
      <title>Find and Edit</title>

      <para>To search for an existing customer, use the
        <menuchoice>
          <guimenu>Business</guimenu><guisubmenu>Customer</guisubmenu> <guimenuitem>Find
          Customer</guimenuitem>
        </menuchoice>
        window. You select a customer to <guilabel>View/Edit</guilabel> from the results of the
        search. This window is also used to look up customers when creating invoices and processing
        payments.
      </para>

      <para>If many customers match the search criteria you provide, the search can be refined by running an
        additional search within the current results. The current result set is searched when the
        <guilabel>Refine Current Search</guilabel> radio button is selected. In fact, &app; selects
        this option for you after you run the initial search.
      </para>

      <para>If the customer you are searching for does not match the supplied search criteria, change the search
        criteria, click the <guilabel>New Search</guilabel> radio button and then the
        <guilabel>Find</guilabel> button. The relevant step is the <guilabel>New Search</guilabel>
        selection. If the customer is not in the result of the original search, and you only search
        within this set, the customer cannot be found, regardless of new search criteria.
      </para>

      <tip>
        <para>To return a list of all registered active customers, set the search criterion to <guilabel>matches
          regex</guilabel>, and place a single dot "." in the text field area. Make sure
          <guilabel>Search only active data</guilabel> is checked, then click
          <guibutton>Find</guibutton>. The regular expression "." means to match anything.
        </para>
      </tip>
    </sect2>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="busnss-ar-invoices1">
    <title>Invoices</title>

    <para>An invoice is the paperwork you send to a customer to request payment for products or services
      rendered. &app; can generate and track invoices.
    </para>

    <para>A credit note is the paperwork you send to a customer to correct products or services rendered that
      were incorrectly invoiced. &app; can generate and track credit notes via the same menu entries
      as invoices.
    </para>

    <note>
      <para>This section applies to both invoices and credit notes. In order to avoid repeating everything twice
        and to keep the text easier to read it will refer only to invoices. You can apply it equally
        to credit notes. Only where the behaviour of credit notes differs from invoices this will be
        explicitly mentioned. Credit notes were introduced starting with &app; stable release 2.6.0.
      </para>
    </note>

    <sect2 id="busnss-ar-invoicenew2">
      <title>New</title>

      <para>To send an invoice to a customer you must first create a new invoice. To create an invoice use
        <menuchoice>
          <guimenu>Business</guimenu> <guisubmenu>Customer</guisubmenu><guimenuitem>New
          Invoice</guimenuitem>
        </menuchoice>
        . The New Invoice window must be filled in appropriately:
      </para>

      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Invoice Information - Type</guilabel>: the type of customer document to create - either an
            invoice or a credit note.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Invoice Information - Invoice ID</guilabel> (optional): the formated identification number
            of this invoice. This is your internal number for this invoice. If you leave it blank,
            an invoice number will be generated automatically. See
            <xref linkend="counters-book-options" /> for more info.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Invoice Information - Date Opened</guilabel>: the date this invoice was created.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Billing Information - Customer</guilabel>: the customer who is to receive this invoice. If
            you remember the <emphasis>company name</emphasis> you entered in the <guilabel>New
            Customer</guilabel> window for this customer, start to type it in this field and &app;
            will try auto complete it for you. Else, press the <guibutton>Select...</guibutton>
            button to access the <guilabel>Find Customer</guilabel> window described in
            <xref linkend="busnss-ar-custfind2" />. Highlight the customer you are looking for with
            a click in the search results, then press the <guibutton>Select</guibutton> button.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Billing Information - Job</guilabel> (optional): associates the new invoice with a
            customer job (see <xref linkend="busnss-ar-jobs1" />). If you remember the <emphasis>job
            name</emphasis> you entered in the <guilabel>New Job</guilabel> window for this job,
            start to type it in this field and &app; will try auto complete it for you. Else, press
            the <guibutton>Select...</guibutton> button to access the <guilabel>Find Job</guilabel>
            window. This window is the same to the one described in
            <xref linkend="busnss-ar-custfind2" />. Highlight the job you are looking for with a
            click in the search results, then press the <guibutton>Select</guibutton> button.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Billing Information - Billing ID</guilabel>: this is the customer&rsquo;s PO Number or
            other <quote>customer reference number</quote>. You should use it to identify your
            invoices to this customer (and job, if you have one).
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Billing Information - Terms</guilabel>: the payback terms agreement for this invoice. A
            list of registered terms is available within the pop up menu. If you specified a default
            value for the selected customer, this field is initialized with the default.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Notes</guilabel>: Here you can enter internal notes.
          </para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>

      <para>When you click the <guibutton>OK</guibutton> button, the <guilabel>Edit Invoice</guilabel> window
        opens.
      </para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="busnss-ar-invoiceedit2">
      <title>Edit</title>

      <para>From the Edit Invoice window you can enter an itemized list of goods and services you sold on this
        invoice in a manner similar to how the account register works. For credit notes you enter an
        itemized list of goods and services you refunded instead.
        <tip>
          <para>Saved column layout works a bit differently in invoices from the account registers: Layouts are not
            saved for each invoice; instead a layout can be saved as a default for invoices to
            override the calculated widths using the <guimenu>View</guimenu>&gt;<guimenuitem>Use as
            Default Layout for Customer Documents</guimenuitem> and the calculated widths restored
            as the default with <guimenu>View</guimenu>&gt;<guimenuitem>Reset Default Layout for
            Customer Documents</guimenuitem>.
          </para>
        </tip>
      </para>

      <para>There are 15 columns in the <guilabel>Invoice Entries</guilabel> area:
      </para>

      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Date</guilabel> - The date this item was sold.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Invoiced?</guilabel> - <guilabel>X</guilabel> means the item is attached to this invoice,
            an empty box means the item is not attached to this invoice. The item is attached for
            you when you proceed to the next line item.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Description</guilabel> (optional) - is what the item or service is called.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Action</guilabel> (optional) - is a user defined field. You can place Cost Center
            information here, or use one of the 3 predefined actions, Hours, Material, or Project.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Income Account</guilabel> - selects which income account is credited with this income.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Quantity</guilabel> - tracks how many of the items you sold.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Unit Price</guilabel> - is the unit price of the item.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Discount Type</guilabel> - is the type of discount:
          </para>

          <itemizedlist>
            <listitem>
              <para><guilabel>$</guilabel> means <guilabel>Discount</guilabel> is a monetary value
              </para>
            </listitem>

            <listitem>
              <para><guilabel>%</guilabel> means <guilabel>Discount</guilabel> is a percentage.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </itemizedlist>

          <para>You can click the field to toggle between the discount types.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Discount How</guilabel> - the discount can be computed as follows:
          </para>

          <itemizedlist>
            <listitem>
              <para><guilabel>&gt;</guilabel> means the discount applies after tax.
              </para>
            </listitem>

            <listitem>
              <para><guilabel>&lt;</guilabel> means the discount applies before tax.
              </para>
            </listitem>

            <listitem>
              <para><guilabel>=</guilabel> means both discount and tax are applied to the pretax value.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </itemizedlist>

          <para>You can click the field to change the setting.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Discount</guilabel> (optional) - is the total discount, in monetary units or percentage,
            depending on <guilabel>Discount Type</guilabel>. You can leave it blank for no discount.
            Any default discount you specified for the customer will be automatically entered for
            each new item.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Taxable?</guilabel> - is this item taxable? <guilabel>X</guilabel> means yes, a blank
            field means no. You can click the field to toggle the setting.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Tax Included?</guilabel> - has the tax already been included in the unit price?
            <guilabel>X</guilabel> means yes, a blank field means no. For example, if there is 1
            item of $100 with a tax of 5% then:
          </para>

          <itemizedlist>
            <listitem>
              <para>If Tax Included is empty, then subtotal = $100 and tax = $5.
              </para>
            </listitem>

            <listitem>
              <para>If Tax included is set (<guilabel>X</guilabel>), then subtotal = $95.23 and tax = $4.77. The
                computation is: Subtotal = Total / (1+taxrate) and Tax = Total - Subtotal = Total -
                (Total / (1+taxrate)).
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </itemizedlist>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Tax Table</guilabel> (optional) - this is a pop up menu of all the available tax tables.
            If you make the item taxable, then this table is used to compute the amount of tax. The
            tax table determines tax percentages and the accounts to which tax is charged.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Subtotal</guilabel> (uneditable) - is the computed subtotal for this item (less tax).
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Tax</guilabel> (uneditable) - is the computed tax for this item.
          </para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>

      <para>When you have finished entering all the items, you can <guilabel>Post</guilabel> and print the
        invoice.
      </para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="busnss-ar-invoicepost2">
      <title>Post</title>

      <para>When you finish editing an invoice and are ready to print, you must <guilabel>Post</guilabel> the
        invoice. The invoice does not have to be posted immediately. In fact, you should only post
        an invoice when you are ready to print it. Posting an invoice places the transactions in an
        accounts receivable account.
      </para>

      <para>The <guilabel>Post Invoice</guilabel> window appears and asks you to enter the following
        information:
      </para>

      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Post Date</guilabel> - specifies the date for the transactions entered into the accounts
            receivable account. By default this is the invoice&rsquo;s <guilabel>Date
            Opened</guilabel> (see <xref linkend="busnss-ar-invoicenew2"/> for information about
            that date).
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Due Date</guilabel> - is the date on which payment for the invoice is expected.
          </para>

          <itemizedlist>
            <listitem>
              <para>If you specified payment terms when you created the invoice, the date is calculated according to
                selected terms, and the entry field is insensitive.
              </para>
            </listitem>

            <listitem>
              <para>If you did not specify payment terms, enter the expected payment due date here.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </itemizedlist>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Description</guilabel> - is an arbitrary description. When invoice transactions are placed
            in the accounts receivable account, this description is entered in the memo field of
            those transactions.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Post To Account</guilabel> - selects the accounts receivable account in which invoice
            transactions are posted. You can select the account from a list of existing A/Receivable
            accounts.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Accumulate Splits</guilabel> - determines if invoice items which transfer to the same
            account are combined into a single split for that account or entered individually. For
            the sample invoice which sold Nails and a Hammer, the setting affects post results as
            follows:
          </para>

          <itemizedlist>
            <listitem>
              <para>Checked (splits are accumulated) - a single transfer of $575.00 from the
                <emphasis>Income:Sales</emphasis> account is recorded.
              </para>
            </listitem>

            <listitem>
              <para>Not checked - the transaction created in the A/Receivable account, shows two transfers from
                <emphasis>Income:Sales</emphasis> account $100.00 and $475.00. The memo fields in
                the splits indicate the sale of Nails and the Hammer (the item descriptions entered
                on the invoice) respectively.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </itemizedlist>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="busnss-ar-invoicefind2">
      <title>Find</title>

      <para>To find an existing invoice, use the
        <menuchoice>
          <guimenu>Business</guimenu> <guisubmenu>Customer</guisubmenu><guimenuitem>Find
          Invoice</guimenuitem>
        </menuchoice>
        menu item. From the results of the search, you can select an invoice to edit or view.
      </para>

      <important>
        <para>Before you can edit a posted invoice, you will need to <guilabel>Unpost</guilabel> it.
        </para>
      </important>

      <para>One of the design goals in &app;&rsquo;s Account Receivable system was to allow different processes
        to get to the same state, so you can reach an invoice from different directions based on the
        way you think about the problem:
      </para>

      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>You can search for the customer first, then list their invoices.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>You can search for invoices by number or by company name.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>You can list invoices associated with a customer job.
          </para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="busnss-ar-invoiceprint2">
      <title>Print</title>

      <para>After you post an invoice, you should print it and send it to your customer. To print an invoice use
        <menuchoice>
          <guimenu>File</guimenu> <guimenuitem>Print Invoice</guimenuitem>
        </menuchoice>
        menu item.
      </para>

      <tip>
        <para>You can modify the appearance of the invoice, IE: add a company logo, etc. To do so, see the
          <xref
        linkend="busnss-ar-invoicechange" />.
        </para>
      </tip>

      <para>Invoices can also be printed from the main window by selecting
        <menuchoice>
          <guimenu>Reports</guimenu><guisubmenu>Business Reports</guisubmenu> <guimenuitem>Printable
          Invoice</guimenuitem>
        </menuchoice>
        from the main menu. The resulting report window states that no valid invoice is selected. To
        select the invoice to print:
      </para>

      <orderedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>Use the <guibutton>Options</guibutton> <emphasis>Toolbar</emphasis> button or select
            <menuchoice>
              <guimenu>Edit</guimenu><guimenuitem>Report Options</guimenuitem>
            </menuchoice>
            from the main menu.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>Select the <guilabel>General</guilabel> tab of the report options dialog.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>Click the <guibutton>Select</guibutton> button next to the <guilabel>Invoice Number</guilabel>
            field.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>Search for the invoice as usual.
          </para>
        </listitem>
      </orderedlist>

      <para>You can also print invoices from within the Process Payment dialog. See the
        <xref linkend="busnss-ar-payment1" /> for instructions on how to do so.
      </para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="busnss-ar-invoicestarting2">
      <title>Assign Starting Invoice Number</title>

      <para>By default, &app; starts with invoice number 1 and increments from there. You can manually type an
        invoice number into the text box each time you create an invoice, but this gets tiring and
        sooner or later leads to duplicate numbers.
      </para>

      <para>You can change the starting invoice number if it is important you. Use
        <menuchoice>
          <guimenu>File</guimenu><guimenuitem>Properties</guimenuitem>
        </menuchoice>
        , access the <guilabel>Counters</guilabel> tab, change the <guilabel>Invoice
        number</guilabel> value to be one less than your desired starting invoice number and click
        the <guibutton>OK</guibutton> button or the <guibutton>Apply</guibutton> button.
      </para>
    </sect2>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="busnss-ar-jobs1">
    <title>Customer Jobs</title>

    <para>Customer Jobs are used to group multiple invoices and credit notes to the same customer. Use of the
      Customer Jobs feature is optional. The feature is useful when you have multiple
      <guilabel>jobs</guilabel> for the same customer, and would like to view all the invoices and
      credit notes related to a single job.
    </para>

    <para>To use customer jobs, you must create them using the
      <menuchoice>
        <guimenu>Business</guimenu><guisubmenu>Customer</guisubmenu> <guimenuitem>New
        Job</guimenuitem>
      </menuchoice>
      menu item. You will see the <guilabel>New Job</guilabel> window. The editable fields are:
    </para>

    <itemizedlist>
      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Job Info - Job Number</guilabel> (optional) - enter the number for this job. If left
          blank, a number will be chosen for you. See <xref linkend="counters-book-options" /> for
          more info.
        </para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Job Info - Job Name</guilabel> - the name you want to assign to the new job.
        </para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Owner Info - Customer</guilabel> - the customer for whom the job is created. If you
          remember the <emphasis>company name</emphasis> you entered in the <guilabel>New
          Customer</guilabel> window for this customer, start to type it in this field and &app;
          will try auto complete it for you. Else, press the <guibutton>Select...</guibutton> button
          to access the <guilabel>Find Customer</guilabel> window described in
          <xref linkend="busnss-ar-custfind2" />. Highlight the customer you are looking for with a
          click in the search results, then press the <guibutton>Select</guibutton> button.
        </para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Owner Info - Billing ID</guilabel> - the customer&rsquo;s reference to this job (e.g.
          their PO Number). This is the "Billing Identification" that they require to correlated
          your invoices with their order. The Billing ID you enter is used to set the billing id for
          new invoices associated with this job.
        </para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Job Active</guilabel> - toggles this job being active or not. This is useful when you have
          many inactive jobs, since it is easier to search only among jobs that are marked active.
        </para>
      </listitem>
    </itemizedlist>

    <para>To edit an existing customer job, use the
      <menuchoice>
        <guimenu>Business</guimenu><guisubmenu>Customer</guisubmenu> <guimenuitem>Find
        Job</guimenuitem>
      </menuchoice>
      menu item. Select the desired job in the search results, and click the <guilabel>View/Edit
      Job</guilabel> button.
    </para>

    <para>To select from the invoices and credit notes associated with a given job, use
      <menuchoice>
        <guimenu>Business</guimenu><guisubmenu>Customer</guisubmenu><guimenuitem>Find
        Job</guimenuitem>
      </menuchoice>
      menu item. Select the desired job in the search results and click the <guilabel>View
      Invoices</guilabel> button. A window listing invoices and credit notes associated with this
      job appears. Select an invoice or credit note and click the <guilabel>View Invoice</guilabel>
      button to open an invoice editor in the main application window.
    </para>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="busnss-ar-payment1">
    <title>Process Invoice Payment</title>

    <para>Eventually, you will receive payment from your customers for outstanding invoices. To register these
      payments, use the Process Payment application found in
      <menuchoice>
        <guimenu>Business</guimenu> <guisubmenu>Customer</guisubmenu><guimenuitem>Process
        Payment</guimenuitem>
      </menuchoice>
      .
    </para>

    <tip>
      <para>There is an alternative way of assigning a payment to (one or more) invoices where the payment
        transaction already exists, say in the case where transactions have been imported from a
        bank. There is no way to assign a payment to an invoice during the import process, so this
        must be done after transactions have been imported.
      </para>

      <para>This can best be done starting from the asset account register holding the imported payment
        transaction (like your bank account). In that account, select the payment, right-click
        (control-click for &mac;) and choose <guilabel>Assign as payment...</guilabel>. The payment
        window will pop-up, partly filled in with the information from the transaction. Fill in the
        missing information like the proper customer and invoice to complete the payment.
      </para>

      <para>One caveat: the logic behind <guilabel>Assign as payment...</guilabel> won't properly detect credit
        note reimbursements and will wrongfully interpret such a transaction as a vendor bill.
      </para>
    </tip>

    <para>The Process Payment application consists of:
    </para>

    <itemizedlist>
      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Payment Information - Customer</guilabel> - the customer who paid you. If you remember the
          <emphasis>company name</emphasis> you entered in the <guilabel>New Customer</guilabel>
          window for this customer, start to type it in this field and &app; will try auto complete
          it for you. Else, press the <guibutton>Select...</guibutton> button to access the
          <guilabel>Find Customer</guilabel> window described in
          <xref linkend="busnss-ar-custfind2" />. Highlight the customer you are looking for with a
          click in the search results, then press the <guibutton>Select</guibutton> button.
        </para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Payment Information - Invoice</guilabel> - the invoice for which payment was received. If
          you remember the <emphasis>invoice ID</emphasis>, start to type it in this field and &app;
          will try auto complete it for you. Else, press the <guibutton>Select...</guibutton> button
          to access the <guilabel>Find Invoice</guilabel> window described in
          <xref linkend="busnss-ar-invoicefind2" />. Highlight the invoice you are looking for with
          a click in the search results, then press the <guibutton>Select</guibutton> button.
        </para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Payment Information - Date</guilabel> - the date you you received payment.
        </para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Payment Information - Amount</guilabel> - the amount of money received.
        </para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Payment Information - Num</guilabel> - the check number.
        </para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Payment Information - Memo</guilabel> - any comments about this payment.
        </para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Post To</guilabel> - the A/Receivable account to which to post this transaction.
        </para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Transfer Account</guilabel> - the account where the money will be deposited (a checking
          account for example).
        </para>
      </listitem>
    </itemizedlist>

    <sect2 id="busnss-ar-overpay2">
      <title>Over Payments or Pre-Payments</title>

      <para>If a customer overpays an invoice or pays for goods or services before they have been invoiced,
        Process Payment for the total amount received. &app; will then keep track of the
        over-payment (or pre-payment) in the A/R account and you can use the residual when paying
        the next invoice.
      </para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="busnss-ar-partpay2">
      <title>Partial Payments</title>

      <para>Partial payments are possible too. Select the invoice to pay. &app; will automatically suggest that
        invoice's remaining balance as payment amount. Simply adjust that amount to what you want to
        pay.
      </para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="busnss-ar-baddebt">
      <title>Writing Off a Bad Debt</title>

      <important>
        <para>Please check with your accountant to ensure the following is acceptable in your region.
        </para>
      </important>

      <para>The usual way to do this is to process a payment for the invoice to a <emphasis>BadDebt</emphasis>
        account. Such an account would be an expense account. However, in &app;, you can't process a
        payment for an invoice directly to an expense account, so it takes two steps:
      </para>

      <orderedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>Pay the invoice to an asset or liability account, such as your checking account.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>Change the asset or liability account, in the <emphasis> non</emphasis> Accounts Receivable split of
            the payment transaction, to the BadDebt expense account.
          </para>
        </listitem>
      </orderedlist>

      <para>Specifically
      </para>

      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para>Remove all transactions from the A/R account related to the invoice, except for the invoice's
            transaction itself. This includes any payment transactions, and transactions between
            your BadDebt and A/R account.
          </para>

          <para>In case the payment has associated <emphasis>lot link</emphasis>
            transactions<link linkend="busnss-ar-baddeb-lot"><superscript>a</superscript></link>,
            remove those as well.
          </para>

          <para>If all is well, your <guilabel>Process Payment</guilabel> window for this customer should list the
            invoice the customer won't pay, and no prepayments.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>Pay your invoice to an arbitrary asset or liability account. It can be your checking account. We
            will fix that in the next step.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>Open the account register for your A/R account. For this invoice there should now be one payment
            transaction. If you are using &app; 2.6.0 - 2.6.4 there will also be one lot link
            transaction<link linkend="busnss-ar-baddeb-lot"><superscript>a</superscript></link>.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para>Select the payment transaction and change the transfer account to your <emphasis>BadDebt</emphasis>
            account. Make sure to leave the transaction (eg by clicking on another transaction) to
            save the changes.
          </para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>

      <para>If all is well, your <guilabel>Process Payment</guilabel> window should still be clean: no
        pre-payments, and the bad debt invoice gone.
      </para>
<!-- Todo: As soon as yelp understads <footnotelink> convert this into a <footnote> and the links above in <footnotelink>s. -->
      <caution id="busnss-ar-baddeb-lot">
        <para><superscript>a</superscript> &app; version
          <variablelist>
            <varlistentry>
              <term>2.6.0 to 2.6.4</term>

              <listitem>
                <para>created lot link transactions which show in the A/R account register. This came with its own set of
                  subtle issues.
                </para>
              </listitem>
            </varlistentry>

            <varlistentry>
              <term>2.6.5</term>

              <listitem>
                <para>had a flaw in the logic cleaning up the lot links.
                </para>
              </listitem>
            </varlistentry>
          </variablelist>
        </para>

        <para>It is recommended to upgrade to the latest (or at least 2.6.6) version, which fixes a lot of small
          problems. Once upgraded, please run
<!-- ToDo: Replace the <menuchoice> after the entities are fixed by:  &mc.ac.chk-rep.all; or at least &mc.ac.chk-rep.acct; 
          on your A/R and A/P accounts -->
          <menuchoice>
            <guimenu> Actions</guimenu><guimenuitem>Check &amp; Repair</guimenuitem>
          </menuchoice>
          to clean up most of the lot link legacy. Don't forget to make a backup first just in case.
        </para>

        <variablelist>
          <title>Distinction between <emphasis>Lot</emphasis> and <emphasis>Lot link</emphasis></title>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>Lots</term>

            <listitem>
              <para>are used internally for relating payments to invoices. Lots themselves are invisible in the account
                registers. To see them you need to open the lot viewer, which can be found in
                &mc.ac.vw-lots; while in any A/R or A/P account register. Select a lot to see the
                <emphasis>Splits in lot</emphasis>.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>Lot links</term>

            <listitem>
              <para>are <emphasis>transactions</emphasis> which you can see in your A/R and A/P accounts. They are
                unusual in the sense that all their splits are in one account (A/R or A/P). Each
                split in a lot link transaction is <emphasis>linked</emphasis> (hence the name) to
                an invoice or payment transaction by means of a lot.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        </variablelist>
      </caution>

      <para>See <ulink url="&url-wiki-bus-feat;"  /> for more information.
      </para>
    </sect2>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="busnss-ar-invoicechange">
    <title>Changing the Invoice Appearance</title>

    <para>The default Invoice style, as shown in <xref
    linkend="busnss-ar-invoiceprint2" />, is fairly
      barren. The default invoice style leaves the top part of the form blank, so you can print on
      company letterhead paper. There are some things you can do to change invoice appearance.
    </para>

    <para>Use
      <menuchoice>
        <guimenu>File</guimenu><guimenuitem>Properties</guimenuitem>
      </menuchoice>
      to enter your Company information in the <guilabel>Business</guilabel> tab of the
      <guilabel>Book Options</guilabel> window. Some of the entered information is printed on the
      right side of invoices.
    </para>

    <para>To add a customized background, heading banner or logo to invoices, modify the invoice style sheets.
      To do this, go to
      <menuchoice>
        <guimenu>Edit</guimenu> <guimenuitem>Style Sheets</guimenuitem>
      </menuchoice>
      and select the <guibutton>New</guibutton> button in the <guilabel>Select HTML Style
      Sheet</guilabel> window that will appear.
    </para>

    <para>Give a <guilabel>Name</guilabel> to the new style sheet (e.g. <guilabel>Custom Invoice</guilabel>)
      and select the <guilabel>Fancy</guilabel> <guilabel>Template</guilabel>. When you click the
      <guibutton>OK</guibutton> button, the <guilabel>HTML Style Sheet Properties</guilabel> window
      is displayed. This window presents you five sections listed in the left pane:
      <guilabel>Colors</guilabel>, <guilabel>Fonts</guilabel>, <guilabel>General</guilabel>,
      <guilabel>Images</guilabel>, and <guilabel>Tables</guilabel>. The <guilabel>Colors</guilabel>
      section allows you to change the colors of various items of the invoice. The
      <guilabel>Fonts</guilabel> section lets you set font type and dimensions. The
      <guilabel>General</guilabel> section allows you to set the <guilabel>Preparer</guilabel> and
      <guilabel>Prepared for</guilabel> information, and to <guilabel>Enable Links</guilabel>. The
      <guilabel>Images</guilabel> section allows you to import graphics into the style sheet. The
      <guilabel>Tables</guilabel> section allows you to adjust the spacing around the tables which
      make up the invoice.
    </para>

    <para>To include a company logo, banner heading and background image, use your favorite graphics
      application such as <application>The Gimp</application> or <application>OpenOffice
      Draw</application> to save the images in either <acronym>GIF</acronym> or
      <acronym>PNG</acronym> format. Then import them into the style sheet using the
      <guilabel>Images</guilabel> section described above.
    </para>

    <note>
      <para>The images are placed in the invoice as follows. The <guilabel>Background Tile</guilabel> is tiled
        to become the background image, the <guilabel>Heading Banner</guilabel> goes above the
        invoice text, and the <guilabel>Logo</guilabel> is placed in the upper left corner of the
        invoice to the left of the Heading Banner. You will probably have to try a few different
        sized images until you get the invoices to print nicely. Some sizing suggestions are that
        the Logo should be 1 square cm (~0.5 inch), and the Heading Banner should be 15 cm (~6
        inches) wide and 1 cm (~0.5 inch) tall.
      </para>
    </note>

    <para>With the style sheet configured, when you print the invoice, you select the style sheet to use from
      the <guimenu>Options</guimenu> menu.
    </para>
  </sect1>
<!-- start of A/P -->
  <sect1 id="busnss-ap-components1">
    <title>Accounts Payable</title>

    <para>&app; has an integrated accounts payable system. As with <emphasis>Accounts Receivable</emphasis>
      you must have an <emphasis>Accounts Payable</emphasis> account set up under
      <emphasis>Liabilities</emphasis> for each currency in which you will issue invoices. The
      <emphasis>Accounts Payable</emphasis> accounts accrue the amounts you owe to others, so bills
      credit these accounts and payments and credit memos debit these accounts. Generally you do not
      directly work with this account but use the four integrated &app; A/P application components.
      The A/P components are available from the
      <menuchoice>
        <guimenu>Business</guimenu><guisubmenu>Vendor</guisubmenu>
      </menuchoice>
      sub-menu.
    </para>

    <para>These A/P components are:
    </para>

    <itemizedlist>
      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Vendors</guilabel> are people or companies from which you buy products or services on
          credit.
        </para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Bills</guilabel> represent the physical bills vendors send to request payment from you. A
          bill contains an itemized list of things you purchased.
        </para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Jobs</guilabel> (optional) is where you register Vendor Jobs. Jobs are a mechanism by
          which you can group multiple bills from a particular vendor.
        </para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Process Payments</guilabel> is where you register payments to a vendor to whom you owe
          money.
        </para>
      </listitem>
    </itemizedlist>

    <para>The following sections introduce the individual Accounts Payable application components.
    </para>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="busnss-ap-vendors1">
    <title>Vendors</title>

    <para>A vendor is a company or person from whom you purchase goods or services. Vendors must be registered
      within the A/P system.
    </para>

    <sect2 id="busnss-ap-vendornew2">
      <title>New</title>

      <para>To register a new vendor, select the
        <menuchoice>
          <guimenu>Business</guimenu><guisubmenu>Vendor</guisubmenu> <guimenuitem>New
          Vendor</guimenuitem>
        </menuchoice>
        menu item. Fill in general information about the vendor, such as Company Name, Address,
        Phone, Fax, etc. Below is a list of the other options:
      </para>

      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Identification - Vendor Number</guilabel> - can be any number by which you would like to
            refer to this vendor. You may leave it blank and a number will be chosen automatically.
            See <xref linkend="counters-book-options" /> for more info
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Identification - Active</guilabel> - differentiates active vendors from inactive ones.
            This is useful when you have many past vendors, and you want to see only those marked
            active.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Payment Address - Name</guilabel> - is the contact name of the person to receive payments
            you make.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Notes</guilabel> - records any additional comments about the vendor. Use it to track names
            of contact people within the vendor&rsquo;s company, for example.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Payment Information - Currency</guilabel> - specifies the payment currency for this
            vendor. It will default to the default currency set in <guilabel>Preferences</guilabel>
          </para>

          <note>
            <para>All Bills and Credit Notes will be denominated in this currency and &app; will require an Accounts
              Payable account in this currency.
            </para>
          </note>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Payment Information - Terms</guilabel> - specifies the default payment terms for this
            vendor. Payment terms must be preregistered using
            <menuchoice>
              <guimenu>Business</guimenu><guimenuitem>Billing Terms</guimenuitem>
            </menuchoice>
            .
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Payment Information - Tax Included</guilabel> - specifies if tax is included in bills from
            this vendor. You can choose <guilabel>Yes</guilabel>, <guilabel>No</guilabel>, or
            <guilabel>Use Global</guilabel>.
          </para>

          <itemizedlist>
            <listitem>
              <para><guilabel>Yes</guilabel> means that tax is already included in amounts on bills.
              </para>
            </listitem>

            <listitem>
              <para><guilabel>No</guilabel> means tax is not included.
              </para>
            </listitem>

            <listitem>
              <para><guilabel>Use Global</guilabel> means to use the setting made in the global preferences accessible
                through
                <menuchoice>
                  <guimenu>Edit</guimenu> <guimenuitem>Preferences</guimenuitem>
                </menuchoice>
                (
                <menuchoice>
                  <guimenu>Gnucash</guimenu><guimenuitem>Preferences</guimenuitem>
                </menuchoice>
                on &mac;).
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </itemizedlist>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Payment Information - Tax Table</guilabel> - specifies a default tax table to apply to
            bills from this vendor. Tax tables must be registered using the
            <menuchoice>
              <guimenu>Business</guimenu><guimenuitem>Tax Table</guimenuitem>
            </menuchoice>
            menu item.
          </para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="busnss-ap-vendorfind2">
      <title>Find and Edit</title>

      <para>To search for an existing vendor, use the
        <menuchoice>
          <guimenu>Business</guimenu> <guisubmenu>Vendor</guisubmenu><guimenuitem>Find
          Vendor</guimenuitem>
        </menuchoice>
        window. You select a vendor to <guibutton>View/Edit</guibutton> from the results of the
        search. This window is also used to look up a vendor when entering bills and processing
        payments.
      </para>

      <para>If many vendors match the search criteria you provide, the search can be refined by running an
        additional search within the current results. The current result set is searched when the
        <guilabel>Refine Current Search</guilabel> radio button is selected. In fact, &app; selects
        this option for you after you run the initial search.
      </para>

      <para>If the vendor you are searching for does not match the supplied search criteria, change the search
        criteria, click the <guilabel>New Search</guilabel> radio button and then the
        <guibutton>Find</guibutton> button. The relevant step is the <guilabel>New Search</guilabel>
        selection. If the vendor is not in the result of the original search, and you only search
        within this set, the vendor cannot be found, regardless of new search criteria.
      </para>

      <tip>
        <para>To return a list of all registered active vendors, set the search criterion to <guilabel>matches
          regex</guilabel>, and place a single dot <quote>.</quote> in the text field area. Make
          sure <guilabel>Search only active data</guilabel> is checked, then click
          <guibutton>Find</guibutton>. The regular expression <quote>.</quote> means to match
          anything.
        </para>
      </tip>
    </sect2>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="busnss-ap-bills1">
    <title>Bills</title>

    <para>A bill is a request for payment you receive from a vendor. &app; can track bills.
    </para>

    <para>A credit note is the document you receive from a vendor to correct products or services rendered
      that you were incorrectly charged for on a bill. &app; can generate and track credit notes via
      the same menu entries as bills.
    </para>

    <note>
      <para>This section applies to both bills and credit notes. In order to avoid repeating everything twice
        and to keep the text easier to read it will refer only to bills. You can apply it equally to
        credit notes. Only where the behaviour of credit notes differs from bills this will be
        explicitly mentioned.
      </para>
    </note>

    <sect2 id="busnss-ap-billnew2">
      <title>New</title>

      <para>When you receive a bill from a vendor and want to enter it into &app;, you must create a new bill.
        To create a new bill use the
        <menuchoice>
          <guimenu>Business</guimenu><guisubmenu>Vendor</guisubmenu><guimenuitem>New
          Bill</guimenuitem>
        </menuchoice>
        menu item, and fill in the resulting window appropriately.
      </para>

      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Bill Information - Type</guilabel> - the type of vendor document to create - either a bill
            or a credit note.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Bill Information - Bill ID</guilabel> (optional) - the identification number of the
            invoice as emitted by the vendor (IE: the vendor&rsquo;s internal number for this
            invoice).
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Bill Information - Date Opened</guilabel> - the date the Invoice was emitted by the
            vendor.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Billing Information - Vendor</guilabel> - the issuing vendor. If you remember the
            <emphasis>company name</emphasis> you entered in the <guilabel>New Vendor</guilabel>
            window for this vendor, start to type it in this field and &app; will try auto complete
            it for you. Else, press the <guibutton>Select...</guibutton> button to access the
            <guilabel>Find Vendor</guilabel> window described in
            <xref linkend="busnss-ap-vendorfind2" />. Highlight the vendor you are looking for with
            a click in the search results, then press the <guibutton>Select</guibutton> button.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Billing Information - Job</guilabel> (optional) - associates a vendor job (see
            <xref linkend="busnss-ap-jobs1" />) with this bill. If you remember the <emphasis>job
            name</emphasis> you entered in the <guilabel>New Job</guilabel> window for this job,
            start to type it in this field and &app; will try auto complete it for you. Else, press
            the <guibutton>Select...</guibutton> button to access the <guilabel>Find Job</guilabel>
            window. This window is very similar to the one described in
            <xref linkend="busnss-ap-vendorfind2" />. Highlight the job you are looking for with a
            click in the search results, then press the <guibutton>Select</guibutton> button.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Billing Information - Billing ID</guilabel> (optional) - the vendor&rsquo;s ID for the
            bill (e.g.: their invoice #).
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Billing Information - Terms</guilabel> - the pay back terms agreement for this bill. A
            list of registered terms is available within the pop up menu. If you specified a default
            value for the selected vendor, this field is initialized with the default.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Default Chargeback Project - Customer</guilabel> (optional) - the customer to associate
            with this bill. This is used to charge your customer later.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Default Chargeback Project - Job</guilabel> (optional) - the customer job to associate
            with this bill.
          </para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>

      <para>When you click the <guibutton>OK</guibutton> the <guilabel>Edit Bill</guilabel> window opens.
      </para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="busnss-ap-billedit2">
      <title>Edit</title>

      <para>From the Edit Bill window you can enter an itemized list of goods and services you purchased, in a
        manner similar to how the account register works. For credit notes you enter an itemized
        list of goods and services the vendor refunded instead.
        <note>
          <para>Saved column layout works a bit differently in invoices from the account registers: Layouts are not
            saved for each invoice; instead a layout can be saved as a default for invoices to
            override the calculated widths using the <guimenu>View</guimenu>&gt;<guimenuitem>Use as
            Default Layout for Vendor Documents</guimenuitem> and the calculated widths restored as
            the default with <guimenu>View</guimenu>&gt;<guimenuitem>Reset Default Layout for Vendor
            Documents</guimenuitem>.
          </para>
        </note>
      </para>

      <para>There are 12 columns in the Invoice Entries area:
      </para>

      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Date</guilabel> - The date this item was sold.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Invoiced?</guilabel> - <guilabel>X</guilabel> means the item is attached to this invoice,
            an empty box means the item is not attached to this invoice. If the box is empty you can
            attach the item to the invoice by first selecting the item row and then clicking in this
            box.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Description</guilabel> (optional) - is what the item or service is called.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Action</guilabel> (optional) - is a user defined field. You can place Cost Center
            information here, or use one of the 3 predefined actions, Hours, Material, or Project.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Expense Account</guilabel> - selects the expense account to charge for this item.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Quantity</guilabel> - tracks how many of the items you bought.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Unit Price</guilabel> - is the unit price of the item.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Taxable?</guilabel> - is this item taxable? <guilabel>X</guilabel> means yes, a blank
            field means no. You can click the field to toggle the setting.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Tax Included?</guilabel> - has the tax already been included in the unit price?
            <guilabel>X</guilabel> means yes, a blank field means no.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Tax Table</guilabel> (optional) - this is a pop up menu of all the available tax tables.
            If the item is taxable and tax has not been included in the unit price, then this tax
            table is used to compute the amount of tax.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Subtotal</guilabel> (uneditable) - computed subtotal for this item (less tax)
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Billable</guilabel> - is this item billable to the chargeback customer/job?
          </para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>

      <para>When you have finished entering all the items, <guilabel>Post</guilabel> the bill.
      </para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="busnss-ap-billpost2">
      <title>Post</title>

      <para>When you finish editing a bill, you should <guilabel>Post</guilabel> the bill. You do not have to
        post the bill, you can close it and return to it later. You have to post the bill
        eventually. Posting a bill places its transactions into an accounts payable account. The
        Post Bill window appears and asks you to enter information:
      </para>

      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Post Date</guilabel> - specifies the date for the transactions entered into the accounts
            payable account.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Due Date</guilabel> - is the date on which payment for the bill is expected.
          </para>

          <itemizedlist>
            <listitem>
              <para>If you specified payment terms when you created the bill, the date is calculated according to
                selected terms, and the entry field is insensitive.
              </para>
            </listitem>

            <listitem>
              <para>If you did not specify payment terms, enter the expected payment due date here.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </itemizedlist>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Description</guilabel> - is an arbitrary description. When bill transactions are placed in
            the accounts payable account, this description is entered in the memo field of those
            transactions.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Post To Account</guilabel> - selects the accounts payable account in which bill
            transactions are posted. You can select the account from a list of existing A/Payable
            accounts.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Accumulate Splits</guilabel> - determines if bill items which transfer to the same account
            are combined into a single split for that account or entered individually. For the
            sample bill for Letterhead and Envelopes, the setting affects post results as follows:
          </para>

          <itemizedlist>
            <listitem>
              <para>Checked (splits are accumulated) - a single transfer of $100.00 to the <emphasis>Expenses:Office
                Supplies</emphasis> account is recorded.
              </para>
            </listitem>

            <listitem>
              <para>Not checked - the transaction created in the A/Payable account, shows two transfers to
                <emphasis>Expenses:Office Supplies</emphasis> account $75.00 and $25.00. The memo
                fields in the splits indicate the purchase of Letterhead and Envelopes (the item
                descriptions entered on the bill) respectively.
              </para>
            </listitem>
          </itemizedlist>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="busnss-ap-billfind2">
      <title>Find</title>

      <para>To find an existing bill, use the
        <menuchoice>
          <guimenu>Business</guimenu><guisubmenu>Vendor</guisubmenu><guimenuitem>Find
          Bill</guimenuitem>
        </menuchoice>
        menu item. From the results of the search, you can select a bill to edit, or view.
      </para>

      <note>
        <para>Before you can edit a posted bill, you will need to <guilabel>Unpost</guilabel> it.
        </para>
      </note>

      <note>
        <para>There are other ways to access an existing bill. These are similar to accessing invoices for your
          customers. See <xref linkend="busnss-ar-invoicefind2" /> for more information.
        </para>
      </note>
    </sect2>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="busnss-ap-jobs1">
    <title>Vendor Jobs</title>

    <para>Vendor Jobs are used to group multiple bills and credit notes from a single vendor. Use of the
      vendor jobs feature is optional. The feature is useful when you have multiple
      <guilabel>jobs</guilabel> for the same vendor, and would like to view all the bills and credit
      notes for a single job.
    </para>

    <para>To use vendor jobs, you must create them using the
      <menuchoice>
        <guimenu>Business</guimenu><guisubmenu>Vendor</guisubmenu><guimenuitem>New Job</guimenuitem>
      </menuchoice>
      menu item. You will see the <guilabel>New Job</guilabel> window. The editable fields are:
    </para>

    <itemizedlist>
      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Job Info - Job Number</guilabel> (optional) - enter the number for this job. If left
          blank, a number will be chosen for you.
        </para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Job Info - Job Name</guilabel> - the name you want to assign to the new job.
        </para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Owner Info - Vendor</guilabel> - the vendor for whom the job is created.
        </para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Owner Info - Billing ID</guilabel> - the vendor&rsquo;s reference to this job (e.g. their
          PO Number).
        </para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Job Active</guilabel> - toggles this job being active or not. This is useful when you have
          many inactive jobs, since it is easier to search only among jobs that are marked active.
        </para>
      </listitem>
    </itemizedlist>

    <para>To edit an existing vendor job, use the
      <menuchoice>
        <guimenu>Business</guimenu><guisubmenu>Vendor</guisubmenu> <guimenuitem>Find
        Job</guimenuitem>
      </menuchoice>
      menu item. Select the desired job in the search results, and click the <guilabel>View/Edit
      Job</guilabel> button.
    </para>

    <para>To select from the bills and credit notes associated with a given job, use the
      <menuchoice>
        <guimenu>Business</guimenu><guisubmenu>Vendor</guisubmenu> <guimenuitem>Find
        Job</guimenuitem>
      </menuchoice>
      menu item. Select the desired job in the search results and click the <guilabel>View
      Invoices</guilabel> button. A window listing bills and credit notes associated with this job
      appears. Select a bill or credit note and click the <guilabel>View Invoice</guilabel> button
      to open a bill editor in the main application window.
    </para>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="busnss-ap-payment1">
    <title>Process Bill Payment</title>

    <para>Eventually, you need to pay your bills. To do so, use the Process Payment application found in
      <menuchoice>
        <guimenu>Business</guimenu><guisubmenu>Vendor</guisubmenu><guimenuitem>Process
        Payment</guimenuitem>
      </menuchoice>
      .
    </para>

    <tip>
      <para>There is an alternative way of assigning a payment to (one or more) bills where the payment
        transaction already exists, say in the case where transactions are imported from a bank.
      </para>

      <para>This can best be done starting from the asset account register holding the imported payment
        transaction (like your bank account). In that account, select the payment, right-click
        (control-click for &mac;) and choose <guilabel>Assign as payment...</guilabel>. The payment
        window will pop-up, partly filled in with the information from the transaction. Fill in the
        missing information like the proper vendor and bill to complete the payment.
      </para>

      <para>One caveat: the logic behind <guilabel>Assign as payment...</guilabel> won't properly detect credit
        note reimbursements and will wrongfully interpret such a transaction as a customer invoice.
      </para>
    </tip>

    <para>The Process Payment application consists of:
    </para>

    <itemizedlist>
      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Payment Information - Vendor</guilabel> - the vendor you wish to pay. If you remember the
          <emphasis>company name</emphasis> you entered in the <guilabel>New Vendor</guilabel>
          window for this vendor, start to type it in this field and &app; will try auto complete it
          for you. Else, press the <guibutton>Select...</guibutton> button to access the
          <guilabel>Find Vendor</guilabel> window described in
          <xref linkend="busnss-ap-vendorfind2" />. Highlight the vendor you are looking for with a
          click in the search results, then press the <guibutton>Select</guibutton> button.
        </para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Payment Information - Bill</guilabel> - the bill you wish to pay. If you remember the
          <emphasis>bill ID</emphasis>, start to type it in this field and &app; will try auto
          complete it for you. Else, press the <guibutton>Select...</guibutton> button to access the
          <guilabel>Find Bill</guilabel> window described in <xref linkend="busnss-ap-billfind2" />.
          Highlight the bill you are looking for with a click in the search results, then press the
          <guibutton>Select</guibutton> button in the search window.
        </para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Payment Information - Date</guilabel> - the date you wish to make the payment, normally
          the current date.
        </para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Payment Information - Amount</guilabel> - the amount of money to transfer in this payment.
        </para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Payment Information - Num</guilabel> - the check number.
        </para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Payment Information - Memo</guilabel> - any comments about this payment.
        </para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Post To</guilabel> - the A/Payable account to post this transaction.
        </para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
        <para><guilabel>Transfer Account</guilabel> - the account from which money for the payments comes from,
          such as a checking account.
        </para>
      </listitem>
    </itemizedlist>

    <sect2 id="busnss-ap-overpay2">
      <title>Over Payments or Pre-Payments</title>

      <para>If you wish to overpay an invoice or pay for goods or services before they have been invoiced,
        Process Payment for the total amount payed. &app; will then keep track of the over-payment
        (or pre-payment) in the A/P account and you can use the residual in the future.
      </para>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="busnss-ap-partpay2">
      <title>Partial Payments</title>

      <para>You may wish to partially pay a bill. Select the bill to pay. &app; will automatically suggest that
        bill's remaining balance as payment amount. Simply adjust that amount to what you want to
        pay.
      </para>
    </sect2>
  </sect1>

  <sect1 id="busnss-emply">
    <title>Employees</title>

    <para>&app; can help your company by tracking employees. You can register a
      <xref linkend="busnss-emplynew" />, <xref linkend="busnss-emplyedit" /> existing employees,
      create <xref linkend="busnss-emply-newvchr" /> and <xref linkend="busnss-emply-editvchr" />.
    </para>

    <para>Expense vouchers are used to reimburse employees for authorized expenses (f.e. travel, parking, food
      etc...). Employee credit notes are the opposite of expense vouchers.
    </para>

    <sect2 id="busnss-emplynew">
      <title>New Employee</title>

      <para>To register a new employee, select the
        <menuchoice>
          <guimenu>Business</guimenu><guisubmenu>Employee</guisubmenu> <guimenuitem>New
          Employee</guimenuitem>
        </menuchoice>
        menu item. The <guilabel>New Employee</guilabel> window will open with two tabs:
      </para>

      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para><xref linkend="mply-tab1" />
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><xref linkend="mply-tab2" />
          </para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>

      <itemizedlist id="mply-tab1">
        <title>Employee tab</title>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Identification - Employee Number</guilabel> - can be any number by which you would like to
            refer to this employee. You may leave it blank and a number will be chosen
            automatically. See <xref linkend="counters-book-options" /> for more info.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Identification - Username</guilabel> (Mandatory) - a unique username to identify the
            employee.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Identification - Active</guilabel> (Optional) - differentiates active employees from
            inactive ones. This is useful when you have many past employees, and you want to see
            only those marked <guilabel>Active</guilabel>.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Payment Address - Name</guilabel> (Mandatory) - the full name of the employee.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Payment Address - Address</guilabel> (Mandatory) - the address of the employee.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Payment Address - Phone, Fax, Email</guilabel> (Optional)- other optional contact
            information for the employee.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Interface - Language</guilabel> (Optional) -
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Payment Information - Terms</guilabel> (Optional) - specifies the default payment terms
            for this employee. Payment terms must be preregistered using
            <menuchoice>
              <guimenu>Business</guimenu><guimenuitem>Billing Terms</guimenuitem>
            </menuchoice>
            .
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Billing - Default Hours per Day</guilabel> (Optional) -
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Billing - Default Rate</guilabel> (Optional) -
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Billing - Currency</guilabel> - specifies the billing currency for this employee. It will
            default to the default currency set in <guilabel>Preferences</guilabel>
          </para>

          <note>
            <para>All expense vouchers and credit notes for this employee will be denominated in this currency and
              &app; will require an Accounts Payable account in this currency.
            </para>
          </note>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Billing - Credit Account</guilabel> (Optional) -
          </para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>

      <itemizedlist id="mply-tab2">
        <title>Access Control tab</title>

        <listitem>
          <para>Access Control List
          </para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="busnss-emplyedit">
      <title>Find and Edit</title>

      <para>To search for an existing employee, use the
        <menuchoice>
          <guimenu>Business</guimenu> <guisubmenu>Employee</guisubmenu><guimenuitem>Find
          Employee...</guimenuitem>
        </menuchoice>
        menu. You select an employee to <guibutton>View/Edit</guibutton> from the results of the
        search. This window is also used to look up an employee when entering voucher and processing
        payments.
      </para>

      <para>If many employees match the search criteria you provide, the search can be refined by running an
        additional search within the current results. The current result set is searched when the
        <guilabel>Refine Current Search</guilabel> radio button is selected. In fact, &app; selects
        this option for you after you run the initial search.
      </para>

      <note>
        <para>If the employee you are searching for does not match the supplied search criteria, change the search
          criteria, click the <guilabel>New Search</guilabel> radio button and then the
          <guibutton>Find</guibutton> button. The relevant step is the <guilabel>New
          Search</guilabel> selection. If the employee is not in the result of the original search,
          and you only search within this set, the employee cannot be found, regardless of new
          search criteria.
        </para>
      </note>

      <tip>
        <para>To return a list of all registered active employees, set the search criterion to <guilabel>matches
          regex</guilabel>, and place a single dot <quote>.</quote> in the text field area. Make
          sure <guilabel>Search only active data</guilabel> is checked, then click
          <guibutton>Find</guibutton>. The regular expression <quote>.</quote> means to match
          anything.
        </para>
      </tip>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="busnss-emply-newvchr">
      <title>New Expense Voucher/Credit Note</title>

      <para>To register a new expense voucher/ Credit Note, select the
        <menuchoice>
          <guimenu>Business</guimenu><guisubmenu>Employee</guisubmenu> <guimenuitem>New Expense
          Voucher...</guimenuitem>
        </menuchoice>
        menu item. The <guilabel>New Expense Voucher</guilabel> window will open. You can enter the
        following data:
      </para>

      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Voucher information - Type</guilabel> (Optional) - select if you are entering a Voucher or
            a credit note.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Voucher information - Voucher ID</guilabel> (Optional) - can be any number by which you
            would like to refer to this voucher. You may leave it blank and a number will be chosen
            automatically. See <xref linkend="counters-book-options" /> for more info.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Voucher information - Date opened</guilabel> - the date of the voucher. Click on the
            button on the right of the date to open a calendar.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Billing information - Employee</guilabel> (Mandatory) - the employee to which the voucher
            refers.
          </para>

          <tip>
            <para>The field supports auto-completion so if you start typing &app; will try to complete the text
              automatically using existing employees name. You can also press the button
              <guibutton>Select...</guibutton> to open the <link linkend="busnss-emplyedit">Find
              Employee</link> window.
            </para>
          </tip>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Billing information - Billing ID</guilabel> (Optional) - the identification number of the
            document (f.e. the bill number for a dinner).
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Billing information - Terms</guilabel> (Optional) - the pay back terms agreement for this
            bill. A list of registered terms is available within the pop up menu.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Default chargeback project - Customer</guilabel> (Optional) - the Customer to which the
            voucher refers.
          </para>

          <tip>
            <para>The field supports auto-completion so if you start typing &app; will try to complete the text
              automatically using an existing Customer name. You can also press the button
              <guibutton>Select...</guibutton> to open the <link linkend="busnss-ar-custfind2">Find
              Customer</link> window.
            </para>
          </tip>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Default chargeback project - Job</guilabel> (Optional) - the Customer Job to which the
            voucher refers.
          </para>

          <note>
            <para>you can type in this field only if there are one or more jobs registered in &app; belonging to the
              selected Customer.
            </para>
          </note>

          <tip>
            <para>The field supports auto-completion so if you start typing &app; will try to complete the text
              automatically using an existing Customer name. You can also press the button
              <guibutton>Select...</guibutton> to open the <link linkend="busnss-ar-custfind2">Find
              Customer</link> window.
            </para>
          </tip>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Notes</guilabel> - records any additional comments about the voucher/credit note.
          </para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="busnss-emply-editvchr">
      <title>Find Expense Voucher/Credit Note</title>

      <para>To search for an existing Expense Voucher, use the
        <menuchoice>
          <guimenu>Business</guimenu> <guisubmenu>Employee</guisubmenu><guimenuitem>Find Expense
          Voucher...</guimenuitem>
        </menuchoice>
        menu item. You select an Expense Voucher to <guibutton>View/Edit</guibutton> from the
        results of the search. This window is also used to look up an expense voucher when entering
        vouchers and processing payments.
      </para>

      <para>If many expense vouchers match the search criteria you provide, the search can be refined by running
        an additional search within the current results. The current result set is searched when the
        <guilabel>Refine Current Search</guilabel> radio button is selected. In fact, &app; selects
        this option for you after you run the initial search.
      </para>

      <note>
        <para>If the expense voucher you are searching for does not match the supplied search criteria, change the
          search criteria, click the <guilabel>New Search</guilabel> radio button and then the
          <guibutton>Find</guibutton> button. The relevant step is the <guilabel>New
          Search</guilabel> selection. If the expense voucher is not in the result of the original
          search, and you only search within this set, the voucher cannot be found, regardless of
          new search criteria.
        </para>
      </note>

      <tip>
        <para>To return a list of all expense vouchers, set the search criterion to <guilabel>matches
          regex</guilabel>, and place a single dot <quote>.</quote> in the text field area. Make
          sure <guilabel>Search only active data</guilabel> is checked, then click
          <guibutton>Find</guibutton>. The regular expression <quote>.</quote> means to match
          anything.
        </para>
      </tip>
    </sect2>

    <sect2 id="busnss-emply-editvchr2">
      <title>Edit</title>

      <para>From the Edit Expense Voucher window you can enter an itemized list of goods and services the
        employee bought or performed for the job, in a manner similar to how the account register
        works. For credit notes you enter an itemized list of goods and services charged back to the
        employee instead.
        <note>
          <para>Saved column layout works a bit differently in invoices from the account registers: Layouts are not
            saved for each invoice; instead a layout can be saved as a default for invoices to
            override the calculated widths using the <guimenu>View</guimenu>&gt;<guimenuitem>Use as
            Default Layout for Employee Documents</guimenuitem> and the calculated widths restored
            as the default with <guimenu>View</guimenu>&gt;<guimenuitem>Reset Default Layout for
            Employee Documents</guimenuitem>.
          </para>
        </note>
      </para>

      <para>There are 10 columns in the Entries area:
      </para>

      <itemizedlist>
        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Date</guilabel> - The date this item was sold.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Invoiced?</guilabel> - <guilabel>X</guilabel> means the item is attached to this invoice,
            an empty box means the item is not attached to this invoice. If the box is empty you can
            attach the item to the invoice by first selecting the item row and then clicking in this
            box.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Description</guilabel> (optional) - is what the item or service is called.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Action</guilabel> (optional) - is a user defined field. You can place Cost Center
            information here, or use one of the 3 predefined actions, Hours, Material, or Project.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Expense Account</guilabel> - selects the expense account to charge for this item.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Quantity</guilabel> - tracks how many of the items you bought.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Unit Price</guilabel> - is the unit price of the item.
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Subtotal</guilabel> (uneditable) - computed subtotal for this item (less tax)
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Billable</guilabel> - is this item billable to the chargeback customer/job?
          </para>
        </listitem>

        <listitem>
          <para><guilabel>Payment</guilabel> - How the employee was reimbursed. You might enter a check or petty
            cash voucher number here.
          </para>
        </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>

      <para>When you have finished entering all the items, <guilabel>Post</guilabel> the voucher.
      </para>
    </sect2>
  </sect1>
</chapter>
